---
title: "CitronParser"
permalink: /parser-interface/api/CitronParser/
---

[Citron] > [Parser interface] > [`CitronParser`]

[Citron]: /citron
[Parser interface]: /citron/parser-interface
[`CitronParser`]: .

# CitronParser

_Protocol_

Defines the Citron parser interface.

The parser code generated by Citron defines a class that conforms to this
protocol.

  - [Parsing](#parsing)
      - [`consume(token: CitronToken, tokenCode: CitronTokenCode)`](#consumetoken-citrontoken-tokencode-citrontokencode)
      - [`endParsing()`](#endparsing)
  - [Errors](#errors)
      - [`UnexpectedTokenError`](#unexpectedtokenerror)
      - [`UnexpectedEndOfInputError`](#unexpectedendofinputerror)
      - [`StackOverflowError`](#stackoverflowerror)
  - [Stack size](#stack-size)
      - [`maxStackSize: Int?`](#maxstacksize-int)
      - [`maxAttainedStackSize: Int`](#maxattainedstacksize-int)
  - [Tracing](#tracing)
      - [`isTracingEnabled: Bool`](#istracingenabled-bool)
  - [Error capturing](#errorcapturing)
      - [`errorCaptureDelegate: CitronErrorCaptureDelegate?`](#errorcapturedelegate-citronerrorcapturedelegate)
      - [`consume(lexerError: Error)`](#consumelexererror-error)
  - [Associated Types](#associated-types)
      - [`CitronToken`](#citrontoken)
      - [`CitronTokenCode`](#citrontokencode)
      - [`CitronNonTerminalCode`](#citronnonterminalcode)
      - [`CitronSymbolCode`](#citronsymbolcode)
      - [`CitronResult`](#citronresult)
      - [`CitronErrorCaptureDelegate`](#citronerrorcapturedelegate)

---

## Parsing

---

### `consume(token: `[`CitronToken`]`, tokenCode: `[`CitronTokenCode`]`)`

Consumes one token.

This should be called multiple times to pass a sequence of tokens to the
parser. Typically, a separate tokenization stage would generate this
sequence of tokens.

**Parameters:**

  - `token`

    The semantic value of the token, as seen by the code blocks in the grammar.
    
    The type of this argument is the
    [%token_type](/citron/grammar-file/#token_type) type specified in
    the grammar file, available to the parser class as the associated
    type [`CitronToken`].

  - `code`
  
    The token code that Citron knows this token by.
    
    The Citron-generated parser class contains an enum called
    [`CitronTokenCode`] that lists all the terminals in the grammar.
    This argument should be a value of that enum.

**Return value:**

  - None

**Throws:**

  - May throw one of these errors:
      - [`UnexpectedTokenError`](#unexpectedtokenerror)
      - [`StackOverflowError`](#stackoverflowerror)

  - Any errors thrown in the [code blocks] of rules may propagate up
    to the caller of this method.

---

### `endParsing()`

Signifies the end of input. This should be called when there are no more
tokens to consume.

**Parameters:**

  - None
  
**Return value:**

  - Returns the parse result.
  
    The parse result is the value returned by the code block of the
    [start rule] of the grammar.

    The return type of this method is the [semantic type] of the [start
    symbol], available to the parser class as the associated type
    [`CitronResult`].


[start rule]: /citron/grammar-file/#start-rule
[start symbol]: /citron/grammar-file/#start_symbol
[semantic type]: /citron/grammar-file/#types-for-non-terminals

**Throws:**

  - May throw one of these errors:
      - [`UnexpectedEndOfInputError`](#unexpectedendofinputerror)
      - [`StackOverflowError`](#stackoverflowerror)

  - Any errors thrown in the [code blocks] of rules may propagate up
    to the caller of this method.

[code blocks]: ../grammar-file/#code-blocks

---

## Errors

### `UnexpectedTokenError`

An token was encountered at a point that is not supported by the
specified grammar.

### `UnexpectedEndOfInputError`

End of input was encountered before the grammar could be satisfied.

### `StackOverflowError`

Signifies that parsing was aborted because to continue parsing the
number of entries in the stack needs to exceed the [`maxStackSize`] set.

If [`maxStackSize`] is `nil` (the default), this error is never thrown,
and the parser stack is allowed to grow without overflowing.

---

## Stack size

### `maxStackSize: Int?`

If this is `nil` (the default), there is no restriction on how many
entries the parser stack can have.

If this is `non-nil`, this specifies the maximum number of entries that
the parser's stack can be allowed to hold. If an input requires the
stack to grow above that, it would cause a [`StackOverflowError`] to be
thrown, and parsing shall be aborted.

### `maxAttainedStackSize: Int`

This can be queried at the end of the parse to see the maximum number of
entries that the stack ever held during the parse.

We can, for example, observe the effect of left-recursive vs
right-recursive rules on how the stack grows.

[`StackOverflowError`]: #stackoverflowerror
[`maxStackSize`]: #maxstacksize-int

---

## Tracing

### `isTracingEnabled: Bool`

If this is set to `true`, information on how the parsing happens is
printed out. This can be used to debug the parser.

The default value is `false`.

---

## Error capturing

### `errorCaptureDelegate: `[`CitronErrorCaptureDelegate`]`?`

To activate error capturing, this should be set to a class conforming to
the protocol referred to by the [`CitronErrorCaptureDelegate`]
associated type.

If this is `nil`, error capturing is not activated even if the [grammar
file] contains [%capture_errors] directives.

The default value is `nil`.

[`errorCaptureDelegate`]: #errorcapturedelegate-citronerrorcapturedelegate
[%capture_errors]: /citron/grammar-file/#capture_errors
[grammar file]: /citron/grammar-file

### `consume(lexerError: Error)`

To enable error capturing of lexer errors, the lexer errors can be
passed to the parser using this method. Each lexer error should be
passed to this method, one at a time, as and when it is found during
tokenization.

**Parameters:**

  - `lexerError`

    The lexer error that needs to be error-captured.

**Return value:**

  - None

**Throws:**

In any of the following scenarios, error capturing does not apply:

 1. If there are no [error capturing nonterminals][%capture_errors]
    currently being parsed, _or_
 2. If the [`errorCaptureDelegate`]'s `shouldSaveErrorForCapturing`
    method returns `false`

and therefore, the passed `lexerError` is thrown as is.

---

## Associated Types

These associated types are bound to types defined by the
Citron-generated parser code.

### `CitronToken`

The semantic type of each token, as seen by the code blocks in the grammar.
This is the type defined by [%token_type](/citron/grammar-file/#token_type) type in
the grammar file.

### `CitronTokenCode`

This is an enum of all tokens (or terminals) used in the grammar file.

If a [%tokencode_prefix](/citron/grammar-file/#tokencode_prefix) is
specified, the enum values will use that prefix.

### `CitronNonTerminalCode`

This is an enum of all non-terminals used in the grammar file.

If a [%nonterminalcode_prefix](/citron/grammar-file/#nonterminalcode_prefix) is
specified, the enum values will use that prefix.

### `CitronSymbolCode`

This is an enum that represents all symbols (both terminals and
non-terminals) used in the grammar file.

### `CitronResult`

The semantic type of the [start
symbol](/citron/grammar-file/#start_symbol) as specified in the grammar
file.

### `CitronErrorCaptureDelegate`

This is typealiased to a protocol that the [`errorCaptureDelegate`]
should conform to. The name and contents of the protocol are
automatically generated from the [grammar file].

See the [`CitronErrorCaptureDelegate`](../CitronErrorCaptureDelegate)
page for more information.

---

[`CitronToken`]: #citrontoken
[`CitronTokenCode`]: #citrontokencode
[`CitronResult`]: #citronresult
[`CitronErrorCaptureDelegate`]: #citronerrorcapturedelegate
